Lukasz Stafiniak 10.2001

Modular Genetic Programming with Maximal Common Schemata crossover in
the functional language. (MGP is a generalisation of ADF-GP.)

    ABSTRACT: A Brand New World for Genetic Programming!!! ;)

Contents: (to keep track of what and where I want to say)

1. Biological inspirations of genealogical modularity

Molecular similarity often means having a common ancestor. The role of
duplication. Module as an structural unit of genealogical
identity. Functional module vs genealogical module.

2. GMs (Genealogical Modules) for Genetic Programming

Evolving systems with modules at top-level: as rule-based expert
system, TRS (term rewriting system) or CS (classifier system), its
simpler incarnation - a model example for MGP (Modular Genetic
Programming). Crucial operators: crossing over by
choosing one (rewrite) rule for each distinct GM; duplication - creating
new GM by copying (rewrite) rule of chosen old GM; mutation - modifying
a (rewrite) rule without changing its GM identity. Comparison with
classical method and an analogy in classical GA is given.

3. Genetics and evolution - the reason for GP.

Two "definitions" of "gene": following Mendel and following
Williams. Genetics opposed to evolution. Evolution creates new
solutions. Radcliffe's Formae Algebra. Infinitedimensional search
space.

4. Why one should design the crossover operator carefully - biological
   inspirations and their application

"The selfish gene" and its environment. The unit of selection and its
characteristics. What features should crossover have to force genes to
cooperate for adopting the organism for given fitness function: only
alleles from loci of homological functionality should be
exchanged. Critics of classical GP random one-point crossover by
analysing its units of selection.

5. The MCS (Maximal Common Schemata) crossover - the idea and its
   exemplification

Schemata seen as hypoteses - they describe equivalently a set in given space
and a feature of this space points. How Radcliffe defines good
recombination operators. MCS crossover conserves in
children as much of schemata shared by parents as possible. It is
relevant to schemata (hypotesis) space chosen. An algorithm for
combining terms (constructed only with application) is presented -
Terms MCSC (last C for Crossover or Combinator). The proof for its MCS
property is given.

6. Further glimpses of biology -  speciation

Barriers between species are adaptive. But it is often crossing over
that does not work in otherwise well-adapted cross-breed. In
genealogical tree of development of variants of a feature there are no
joins, only branchings, even in the micro scale - only improvings in
relatives are interoperative. More about GMs.

7. Why MCS crossover needs the support of GMs? Extending repertoire of
   functional modules and the confusion it brings

The structure of terms is a simple one - they can be seen as directed
trees. More complex structures cannot be fully explored by Terms MCSC
algorithm. E. g. lambda-terms are better specified by their data-flow
graphs (data-flow here means a graph of term given by beta-reducing
whenever possible and sharing all occurences of formerly applied
argument) than by their syntax trees. Take local bindings
(definitions) - Terms MCSC could either try combinations at random or
always match bindings at corresponding positions. The first solution
would usually match bindings that have nothing in common. When new
bindings are added (at same positions), the second solution would also
match them and would make it impossible for them to coexist. Thus
Lambda-terms MCSC is invented within the domain of MGP, with local
bindings as GMs. The unit of selection is now localised by GM it is
part of and structural thrunk of that GM the unit functionates in.

7. Goal-orienting with types, but how not to constrain expresiveness?

Typed languages order the effort of programmer. More than forbiding
"stupid" unintended mistakes, as adding strings and floats, the
programmer may now start with inventing appropriate types (mostly
data-structures), and then support functions to treat them. For the
first part, GA can use typed language to generate correct programs
only. But evolution cannot have the goal in her mind. It would be
difficult for her to invent appropriate type BEFORE the use of it,
because type alone cannot be evaluated for performance. Thus, I
propose language combining strict types defined afore by human, with
polymorphic variant types as in language OCaml, where constructor
needs not be defined before its use. Now data structures may be
created along with their types, so they (and their types) are only
constrained by selection. 

8. Patterns - functions powered each by its own TRS!

Distinctive feature of modern functional languages, as opposed to mere
descendants of Lisp, is the possiblity to define function by cases
using pattern matching. Its a natural method to decompose
("de-struct") data structures along with fining their treatment
according to their contents. By joining the ideas from chapters 2, 6
and 7 we get a powerful MGP-MCSC system. GMs of this system are both local
bindings and variant cases of functions. If looking for biological
analogy, one can identify enzyme with a local binding and activating
enzyme with matching against a pattern, the performance of enzyme
being the action invoked. Lambda-terms MCSC is extended to
Pattern-terms MCSC.

9. Optimalisation when fitness is continuus in search space (gradient
   methods)

Neural networks as an example of space continuus with respect to
fitness. Optimising at "almost continuus" subspaces generated from
program by parameterizing over its float (or "real") constants
(continuus if functions applied to them are continuus and if fitness
is continuus with respect to values it is supplied with). Additional
speed-up over the GA-evaluation step can be achieved by compiling
parameterized program and then supply parameters in the local
optimisation phase to already compilled program. Continuity concerned
here is not the "general" continuity, but continuity with respect to
mutation steps.

10. Multi-object parallel programming (where each object is a separate
    thread)

I incorporate here yet another idea of nature - that of multicell
organisms. The "complication" is ment especially to real-time systems
with many inputs (receptors) and output (effectors) working
independently (to some extent). All objects-cells share the same code,
but each is in a state that specialises the cell responses to signals
(application of arguments). These states form a hierarchy which
specifies the transition possibilities. Reactions of a stem-cell are
mostly transformations into further states in the hierarchy, but also
signalising to what states other cells should transform. There could
be also an organising state which creates and sends transition signals
to other cells, and kills itself when its duty is done.

11. Further work with MCS. MCS modulo equational theory. Use of MCS
    idea in more classical inductive learning

MCS can be used in structurating huge terms by introducing local
definitions: find a MCS of two (or more) subterms, bind the MCS in
scope of these subterms, then replace the subterms with binded name
applied to values reconstructing subterms. MCS modulo equational
theory: a set of equations is used to transform subterms that
otherwise would have less in common with corresponding subterms in the
other term. A more "operative" algorithm is given for the case of
associavity and commutativity. As for inductive learning, one may use
more sophisticated schemata space than the one provided before as the
hypothesis space. Comparison of MCS algorithm with algorithms learning
grammars inductively.

12. Implementation issues. Sub-language of OCaml to use in MGP with
    Pattern-terms MCSC.

I plan to use OCaml compiler and byte-code executor to run programs in
MGP system. It would be possible to work with representation closer to
bytecode representation than the text source thus speeding things
up alot: typechecking is useless since generated programs are
guarranteed to be correct.

13. MCS in theorem prooving.

Store theorems with their proofs. To proove new goal (hypothesis),
find a  similar theorem and calculate their MCS (it can be done along
with searching). Apply top rule from proven theorem to the MCS, then
apply corresponding rules to created subgoals, but only if application
creates unifier that substitutes for rule unknowns only and not for
MCS scheme variables (it is also the case for top rule
application). Now, to proove the goal it suffices to proove the
subgoals that left with scheme variables instatiated to values from
main goal.

14. Cognitive Systems approach: reward-based systems.

In situation, when some actions of the system may be valuated, not
just the performance of the system as a whole, fitness may be assigned
to parts of the program. When a function succeeds, functions on its
evaluation path (the "callers") and functions used by the successor
(the "called") increase their fitness, and when a function fails, its
"callers" and its "called" decrease their fitness.

15. MGP systems with convergences library - study of an error.

The idea, that led me to MCS: that a discovery can be distilled when
it is brought twice. Are there MCS finding algorithms smart enough to
extract a convergent functionality despite different low-level
descriptions? Then the function(ality) itself can be then put into
library, and programs constructed by combining functions in a top-down
manner: by unifying structures describing extracted phenotypal
features or functions.

16. GP and GAs theory development possibilities.

How to proove that GAs work - a trial for adopting PAC-learnability
theory to GAs framework. The ideas to be used: hillclimbing, learning
with query for examples, learning with positive examples, hypotheses
space, schemata (formae), bricks' hypothesis, search subspaces,
iterating concept search. 

17. New paradigm for GP - a need for new mathematics (new structures
    on programs space).

Operators (mutation, error backpropagation, crossover, etc.) induce
structures on solutions space. Population corresponds to system of
(e.g. hamiltonian) mechanics. The space connected to a point in
phasespace is the probability distribution over "copies" of phasespace
after time = dt of applying operators (according to GA(t) distribution
of operators), paired with structures induced by those operators
(e.g. [distribution on] neighbourhood for unary operators, MCS +
substitutions for parents in case of MCS crossover,
etc.). Multipopulational modelling (e.g. )

18. Coevolutionary approach based on GBML:cognitive systems as in
    Goldberg1987, where a whole ecosystem is a "solution".

With diverse populations of specialised specimen it should be harder
to stuck in "local optima", as there is more "buffer space" for
code. Local environments in thehe systems are dynamical - they undergo
changes even if the "fitness" has stabilized. Movement in code
resources can discover new "nyches", can invent new approaches to
problem treatment; code can be evaluated against its "dynamics": its
reusability, its capabilities of spreading to many "nyches"
(specialisation, or radiation). The individuals are more free than
genes to diffuse into new environments



1. Biological inspirations of genealogical modularity

Molecular similarity often means having a common ancestor. The role of
duplication. Module as an structural unit of genealogical
identity. Functional module vs genealogical module.

Molecular biology possess a definition of gene different (more
concrete) to the one I will introduce in chapter 3: here gene is the
portion of DNA information used to code a protein (or an RNA
enzyme). These are "executional units" of genome. By the means of
mutation and selection, they evolve to perform certain
tasks. (Literally it is DNA that evolves; some changes in DNA
correspond to changes in proteins they encode.) Due to the importance
of their performance, genes generally cannot go through rapid
changes. Moreover, even a "loose" gene (not playing an important role
yet), cannot evolve into any function, because "fine" functions are
adaptive only supported by certain backgrounds (so to say only
demanded genes can evolve). Gene has a functional identity, it is
bound to function it performs; functions change at far slower pace
than mutation works, because to change a function you need to change
many genes whose performance supports or is supported by this
function. (Thus, 3. order structure of a protein, as corresponding to
functionality is  more conservative than 1. order structure, and
thereby is used to determine a common ancestory.) As a result of
convergence, different genes can evolve towards performing the same
function, but yet they usually will still be structurally different
(as different structures can perform similarily if they have relevant
similarities). As in the law of Dollo, which says that evolution can
never backtrace, different genes would rarely fully converge in
structure, to become almost identical DNA or aminoacid
subsequences. There are just "too many degrees of freedom". And if
some function demands a very particular structure (here it would be only
meaningful aminoacid sequence was to be involved) the gene is
probably "hard to invent" and thus once discovered it would rather
span to all "branches of life" involved than be rediscovered. When
selectiveness is released the chances for a coupling in DNA encodings
space are even less probable due to astronomical hugeness of this
space. That is why even a small DNA-level similarity leads us to the
conclusion that the similar parts of DNA must come from a common ancestor.

The complexity of genome grows by duplications of DNA. It is not just
that there is "more" of it now. When there are two copies of a gene,
one copy may decrease or (even) loose its previous functionality,
possibly achieving new one. The selection of new function is possible
since the gene "works" (is transcribed). Methinks starting with a random
sequence and "tuning" it would usually do worse because, as I see it,
an accidental protein in an organism would lessen fitness of that
organism. Larger improvings are easier to achieve by selecting minor
consecutive changes of genes involved rather than introducing new gene
"from scratch". For those who complain about slowliness of the process
of point mutations evolution prepared a whole machinery, which involve
- among others - intra-gene duplication, when gene lenghtens by
duplicating its part. It is intron-exon machinery. It turned out that
proteins can be naturally divided into functional parts, in molecular
biology called modules. These are "operationally meaningful" blocks,
which build proteins, like in LEGO: evolution takes some blocks of this
shape, some of that, some additions of rare shapes and builds whatever
she wants. For this to work (that is, to give the possibility to
interoperate blocks, copy, insert and delete them), exons - modules'
encodings - are separated by introns, parts of DNA that is not
transcribed to proteins. Introns are not meaningless - they must cut
themselves out of the encoding (when it is transcribed to RNA) (or
make enzymes do it). Duplication may repete exons without cutting them
in the middle, they may as well be transported to other gene. Even exons
encoded on quite remote areas of chromosome may be joined! This work
does not bother with the intron-exon shuffling, but do not worry! -
language presented further on allow any number of levels of "procedure
hierarchy", not only two levels: that of exons and that of genes.

We will be concerned with duplication (and deletion) of genes. Each
gene has an identity - the function it performs. But when gene is
copied (duplicated), it may change its identity - it may achieve new
function - if there is no need for "two actors in one role". That kind
of gene, bound to certain function, we call a genealogical
module. "Genealogical" means that identity is passed in vertical gene
transmission, from ancestor to descendants, and is lost in
duplications. That is very different to the meaning of functional
module in molecular biology which we mentioned. Mutation does not
change the genealogical identity. So there may be different genes (in
the molecular nomenclature) being the same genealogical module
(abbreviated GM), but only one per organism, because when gene is
duplied, new GM is created (gene looses old identity and gains new
one). Functional module has the reverse meaning - it often is repeated
even in one gene, and is changed when mutation occurs. Yet there are
some similarities - functional modules usually (if not almost always)
are related by duplication (we have chosen not to relate GMs by
duplication because duplication CAN break the functional identity, yet
it NEEDS NOT do so), and it is possible that the same GM (as exon) can
participate in different proteins (by means of RNA or protein edition
after translation). The definition of GM gives it the feature I
secretly sought - GM corresponds to a locus! Because GM is invariant
to mutation and kept from generation to generation, and is only one
per organism, we can identify the loci taken by one GM in different
organisms.




2. GMs (Genealogical Modules) for Genetic Programming

Evolving systems with modules at top-level: as rule-based expert
system, or TRS (term rewriting system) - model examples for MGP
(Modular Genetic Programming). Crucial operators: crossing over by
choosing one (rewrite) rule for each distinct GM; duplication -
creating new GM by copying (rewrite) rule of chosen old GM; mutation -
modifying a (rewrite) rule without changing its GM identity.

The systems concerned here are similar to biological systems from
previous paragraph. Each production (or rewrite rule) is composed of
two "genes" - first gene manages translation (rewriting, firing) of
the other, operational gene. The other, when translated, may work in
the environment, or signal the need for translation of yet other
genes. One signal can "fire" a group of genes. After some
augmentations, classifier system, with its rewriting of all matching
rules, can be used to model molecular machinery of a cell. Now I
propose a sketch of a simple MGP system with top-level GMs. Each rule
has assigned a GM. GMs are identified by integers, rule remembers the
number - its identifier (ID). In systems with global communication, GM
ID is just the consecutive number of GM: when dupplicating, new GM is
assigned the just increased number of GMs ever created in MGP system
run. If communication is constrained to local domains, the count is
made locally in the domain, and the number is prefixed by the domain
number. In systems, where one cannot even support different numbers to
domains, a random number is chosen for new GMs. GMs can remember their
parents (in a separate structure) - numbers (or identifiers) assigned
to rules they were copied from. When combining two programs (or
systems), rules with the same GM identifiers (or of those that are
close in GM hierarchy) are matched, if an additional rule-crossover
operator is given, it is applied to matched rules, otherwise just one
rule of a pair ich chosen at random. Unmatched GMs are, in general,
all added to the new system. If an unmatched rule is known not to be
used by any other rule in new system, it may be discarded, if it is
not discarded, it becomes a "junk-code", a nonexpressed code, which,
not restricted by selection, can change at mutation pace. Further on,
this code can be introduced again, by a mutation that makes one of
expressed rules "fire" this code.

MGP approach is opposed to e.g. following classical approach,
represented by an early work of S. F. Smith (1980-1984) (as presented
in D. E. Goldberg "Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimisation and
Machine Learning", 1989). In the system LS-1 genetic algorithm is
similar to the one presented here, but recombination differs. To
recombine two sequences of rules, two points are chosen, one in each
sequence, and then subsequences starting at those points are exchanged
(it is an analogy of classical crossover or two-point GP
crossover). Additionaly, inversion operator is used, so that the rules
that cooperate had the possibility to "met" (this gene correlation is
called epistasis).

Another example corresponding to MGP from Goldberg is the work of
Frantz (1972). Inversion works in classical setting, that is with
fixed set of genes (see next sections). But genes there have
identifiers, as GM identifiers. All solutions in classical setting
belong to one "species", so should have alleles of all genes, but
inversion together with classical crossover can "loose" genes. It is
interesting to see the ways Frantz solved the problem:

1) Strictly homological matching. Only individuals that have the same
   ordering of genes are recombined. This separates population into
   lots of "chromosomal" species, that is specimen of which have
   identical set of genes, but due to different organisation of this
   genes they cannot crossbreed (this situation happens in
   nature). Because MGP is not positionally based, the problem of
   finding homological pair of loci is not a problem (identifiers
   indicate it) - a "superiority" over nature? An analogy of "strictly
   homological matching" would be a situation, when only the systems
   with identical GMs were recombined.

2) Matching based on liveness. Recombination of any individuals is
   allowed, but only the individuals that "perform" are introduced
   into population. It corresponds to a strategy in MGP, when one
   cares less about creating proper individuals (e. g. if a GM demands
   some other GM to work), just if the system does not evaluate, or
   evaluates to fitness below some threshold, it is discarded. This is
   important to systems, where introduction of new GM, without
   modification of other GMs, can dramatically change the performance
   (these are neither functional, neither imperative systems (with
   "main" function), but TRS-like systems, e.g. rule-based
   systems). These systems hardly depend on interpretation of
   nonpresent genes as the presence of empty alleles of these genes
   (see later sections). In these systems one cannot carelessly
   introduce "junk" code.

3) Matching based on pattern. In this crossover operator, before
   classical crossover performs, one of the individuals has genes
   reordered according to the order of the other. This brings the idea
   that in MGP system one could choose one of recombined individuals
   as a pattern of what genes are to be passed to created child: for
   genes that appear in both parents, either allele is chosen, but
   other genes come only from one chosen parent.

4) Matching based on better pattern. As above, but always the better
   fitted (with bigger fitness) parent is chosen to constitute the
   pattern.

The analogy inspired a very promising idea: recombination based on
pattern in MGP. But one has to remember that this is a very far
analogy. In classical GA with inversion, identifiers were introduced
to indicate gene identity, when loci-based identity was needed for
other purposes than identifying genes. In MGP, identifiers were
introduced to indicate inter-individual gene identity where no other
means for identity are present. (Still, the pattern matching may "not
work", because the alternative allele may cooperate with genes not
present in pattern-giving parent). Another, close related work is the
adaptation of breeding or reproduction barriers in classical
GAs. Discussion of speciation and reproduction partners prefferences
of individuals are discussed later. Booker (1982, 1985 taken from
Goldberg 1989), introduced mating templates: patterns, that must match
against the genotype of the other solution to allow for
crossover. When modified by Holland (1985, presented by Goldberg
1985), it turned to be a generalisation of my GMs. Each solution has a
pattern (or template), an id (identifier), and a traditional body. Two
solutions are allowed to recombine only if the pattern of one matches
against the identifier of the other. The pattern and the id evolve
just as the rest of genome. It is a pity I have not seen more related
work, to see the idea in play. In GM, the pattern is the identifier
itself, so it is fully specified, and it does not evolve, because it
is not structured itself (it is an "atom"). If it turns out that, due
to the high rate of duplication, it is important to relax the GMs
matching rigour, the genealogy tree should be used: those GMs that are
more related (closer in genealogy tree), are paired. The patterns
would need a mechanism to specify them, where the matching by
genealogy trees does not charge evolution with identification
mechanism. In classical GA this approach for mating solutions was
explored too. E.g. in the early work of Hollstein (1971, after
Goldberg 1989), relatives mating was performed as long as the fitness
of family grew, only then inter-family (cross-line) breeding was
performed (see later sections). GMs and their IDs were introduced to
identify genes, not to identify species or subspecies, so this is very
different setting, but the solution is the same - genealogical
identity, or relatives mating (matching).



3. Genetics and evolution - the reason for GP.

Two "definitions" of "gene": following "Mendel" and following
Williams. Genetics opposed to evolution. Evolution creates new
solutions. Radcliffe's Formae Algebra. Infinitedimensional search
space.

Molecular definition of gene corresponds to the definition of cistron
- the part of sequence between consecutive "start of translation" and
"end of translation" signs - they can be identified, although in the
presence of exon shuffling the former defines more complicated DNA
sequence subsets. Here I will introduce another two definitions of
gene.  The first defines gene as the hereditary feature that cannot be
divided into features such that not all of them need to be inherited
("hereditary feature atoms"). These genes are "phenotype-oriented":
gene for long legs, etc. The other definition uses "gene" and "unit of
selection" interchangeably: defines gene as the part of chromosome (of
the DNA sequence, of the genotype) small enough to survive through
enough number of generations so that selection can have impact on its
quantity (in population) ("hereditary information atoms"). The "Mendel
genetics" was originally developed in opposition to evolutionists
(begining of XXth century). Why was it so? Genetists searched for
genes of examined species, bred them for purposes of clarifying those
genes-features. If they selectioned a plant for the biggest size of
its seeds, the selection finally stuck with the line of gene for
biggest seeds (from the initial population). They could not see how
selection could introduce new species, could construct new mechanisms,
find new solutions for adaptative challanges. The mutations they saw
were contradaptative (mostly, created "monsters"). They thought
selection was just getting rid of the spoiling mutations, and that
wild populations represented "wild genotype", the best fitted genotype
for given species. They were unaware of the genetical diversity of
wild populations. But most of all, they were unaware that gradual
mutational changes can draw a population to become new species, given
the selective force is present (that is, selectively significant
micro-improvings are possible). Selection of existing genes may, due
to mutational diversity gains, introduce new genes.

The definitions of gene I gave are a bit unfortunate. In genetics,
allele stands for the unit I called gene so far. The gene corresponds
to the set of alleles that are interchangeable, such that no two
alleles from this set can be present at once in an organism, and at least
one of them must be present. In "chromosome-oriented" definitions (the
one I called "molecular" and the one following Williams) gene
corresponds to locus, the place of chromosome alleles of given gene
occupy. The nice mathematical characterisation for "Mendelian" or
"phenotype-oriented" genes and alleles was given by Radcliffe. (As
general GAs theory needs not concern genetical information dubbling and
dominative / recessive alleles, the main discovery of Mendel, the
"Mendelian" term is a bit of abuse because it stands just to name
"phenotype-oriented" or "phenomenological" - concerning organisms only
- definition.) The characterisations of a species are equivalence
relations which say if two specimen share a feature or not. For these
relations a basis is constructed - such minimal set of equivalence
relations that any characterisation can be constructed by intersection
of them (logical "and"). Elements of basis are genes, and their
equivalence classes are alleles. Although the situation is somehow
unhealthy, the term gene will be used in both means, to recover which
one is meant from the context. Sometimes, for example, it is said about
"gene" to mean one allele, and about "alleles" to mean other alleles
of the gene the first allele belongs to.

Radcliffe suggests to specify features, that are thought to be
relevant to the performance of the system being evolved, and such that
they are faithful, that is from description by these features one can
construct a solution. He goes further than classical GA, allowing us
define any features to describe the solution, and giving operators
that always construct proper individuals, even if some combination of
properties (alleles) we defined are illegal. When the complexity of
the solutions in search space grows, the situation complicates. In
biological settings, for example, you take an animal, figure out
properties relevant to its survival, as the length of the legs, the
thickness and colour of the fur, the shape of the ears. Not to go into
too many incompatible features, it is enough to explore only one
species, where specimen can freely combine. Only when you put enough
of the specimen into registers, you can select enough genes to
distinguish all different individuals (excluding clones or "one-egg"
twins). (Given one individual, when would you stop finding yet another
property? It would be somehow arbitrary. Most difficult, if not
impossible would be to "invent" all alternatives for given feature.)
But when the population is fully described, formae algebra proves
useful. Just divide the population into any grouping relevant to
description (according to legs length, fur thickness, etc.). An
algorithm is then applicable which will find the minimal and unique
set of feature kinds, or relations, needed to describe (or identify)
any individual with respect to collected description. These are called
genes. If it is deducible whether a set of features may "coexist"
(describe real being), one can then explore the space of specimen,
possibly combining alleles that have not yet met in real population.

Genetic search is thus made in multidimensional space, each dimension
corresponding to gene, allele of that gene being the possible
value. The search marks promising hyperrectangles, descends to
subspaces, cummulates at the gridpoints of the grid marked out by best
so far solutions. Thanks to formae algebra, the search space is not
the multidimensional space itself, but submerged in it a complicated
figure of the realisable. And recombining operators designed by
Radcliffe never go off the figure into forbidden area, but still allow
the full as possible freedom of traversing the search
space. Finite population generates a subspace in the search space with
respect to recombination operator - the subspace is always
finite(dimensional). But do not make the mistake of first genetists -
the dimensions are not fixed! If they were, evolution would sooner or
later run out of possibilities. Search space is infinitedimensional!
By mutation, new dimensions are introduced, the whole populational
subspace floats in the infinite search space. If two populations of
one species are separated, the subspace will be probably soon torn
into parts, if only the environments populations inhabit differ - this
is called speciation. When classical GAs demand the finite search
space to be set by a human, and restrict themselves to that space, GP
takes the challange to "decorate the scene" by itself, and then is not
restricted to any local subspace but may manage many finite subspaces
floating in the infinite space of programming language chosen. GP
cannot work with phenotype-oriented genes. No man could specify the
infinite set of features that can be programmed in real programming
language. We gain the unlimited possibilities, but we loose the formae
algebra, at least as an operative model.

But the freedom Radcliffe gives us in selecting equivalence relations,
or features, is not just for "unbounded joy of creation". Radcliffe
warns us, that if genes are not related to performance, if "mean
allele's fitness" has too high variation, and the variation does not
decrease sufficiently for groups of alleles, the GA will not fulfill
our expectations. As GP cannot perform by means of phenotype-oriented
genes, I take the second definition of gene to foundate GP on. Here
the observations of Radcliffe apply too. But as the formae cannot be
specified apriori, the general recombinators of Radcliffe will not
apply. Because it is recombination operators that generates the search
subspace of population, directly recombination operators are
responsible for what genes and alleles are. This will be the subject
of the next section.



4. Why one should design the crossover operator carefully - biological
   inspirations and their application

"The selfish gene" and its environment. The unit of selection and its
characteristics. What features should crossover have to force genes to
cooperate for adopting the organism for given fitness function: only
alleles from loci of homological functionality should be
exchanged. Critics of classical GP random one-point crossover by
analysing its units of selection.

The world of evolution is the world of information. Information is
something abstract enough, as formae of Aristotle, to be identified in
different carriers. The specific of information is its possibility to
be transferred, so that the same information moves between physically
different carriers. Evolution by selection is a way new information is
created, by processes called mutation and recombination, so that it
differs a little from the information present aforehead, and the
presence of information in future is related to what the information
is (so little difference in information means little difference in its
chances of presence in near future of the system). The units of
selection, i. e. parts of information that can survive sufficiently
long, evolve towards higher survivability in the future: these doing
better outlive these doing worse. The way information is related to
its survival is by (carrier and) its environment (e. g. DNA is a
carrier, but RNA is an environment for genetical information of a
cell). Stabble enough, being under influence of the gene, environment
ensures gene survival. Because short sequences of information cannot
form stable close environment (close environment is that part of
environment gene can rely on: mostly a cell) and (positively)
influence more remote environment, and genes are kept short by
mutation (and recombination), they need to cooperate to stabilise
their environment. The first step is surrounding a population of genes
by barrier, or including them in a unit (cell). Genes can then
propagate into environment only by fission of cell, so the
competitiveness within the cell is lessened, (especially if a
chromosome is developed) what easies their coevolution. In genome (the
set of genes of one organism, when chromosome was created, that is
when all genes of a cell can (almost) only replicate at once) each
gene begins to "specialise", that is its genetical information begins
to be bound to some function. All genes of the genome "perform" for
the common wealth. The cooperativeness evolved because, even on the
short hand, it let the replication units (organisms) outperform those
in which no cooperation of genes was present. Yet, because the units
of replication are not the units of selection, cooperation is not an
obvious thing for genes. If only one gene can take over other genes,
it will. To restrict their "selfishness", there evolved recombination
operators such that limit the space of alleles of a gene not to
include the genes which cooperate with the gene concerned. (In nature,
genes constitute recombination that constitutes genes. In GP, a human
constructs mutation and recombination, and by this constitutes genes.)
In the "most ancient times", all other genes were alleles of a given
gene. To be strict, allele is an invention made by "honest"
recombination, for it is not always easy to determine at cost of which
other genes a gene replicates (that is, which genes will thus be
"ruled out of business"): it is the case for example when a gene can
insert itself into different parts of chromosome (this insertion needs
to be that gene activity; when it is done by accident, we would rather
say that a new gene will gradually form from the copy - see the
section "Biological inspirations of genealogical modularity"). There
may be different kinds of USels (units of selection) in one system; in
the example above we have traditional hereditary genes, the first,
"mostly productive" kind of USels, and "self-inserting" genes, which
span through chromosome like a virus, the USel that usually lessens
the adaptiveness of the organism that includes genes of this second
kind of unit of selection. As observed, the best kind of USels is the
one where genes are forced to cooperate to increase the fitness of an
organism. It happens so when alleles of a gene are genes that are
bound to the same function, so that the organism does not loose this
functionality after recombination, and does not loose any other
functionality. Just the selection for best performance of functions
that compose an organism (or its features) is expected. One could
argue that there may be useless genes/functions, but a "nasty USel"
would not ask what gene it rules out of genome. The careful analysis
may reveal what kinds of USels are present in the system. Let's try to
analyse the case of classical GP.

The classical GP crossover operator exchanges two random subterms of
recombined programs. Obviously, the closer a position to the root of
program tree, the more probable it will stay with the trunk. And the
smaller the branch of the program tree (subterm) (or the farther it is
from the root, depending of cut point choosing strategy), the more
probable that it will be moved. And this does not depend on whatever
the recombined terms are. Mutation replaces random subterm with
randomly generated one, so again, trunk, and little subterms (as there
are many of them), have big probability to survive. USels, or genes,
are parts of program that survive through enough number of
generations, so there are two kinds of USels: trunks and
branches. Because branches are just arguments to some functions, they
cannot specify in general much of functionality. If programming
language is functional, it can do whatever with the value evaluated by
a branch, so the branch has no functionality - is not bound to any
function, its roles in programs of children it is part of may have
nothing in common. If programming language is imperative (or has
imperative traits), a branch may perform action relevant to fitness of
the program, but still it can hardly communicate with the rest of the
program, as it cannot expect to appear in any certain place, or that
certain other branches will be present too. (Here come my "sharp
words" about classical GP USels, which will be corrected by analysis
of GP-related articles I read after writing the first part of the
work.) One can predict that almost no evolution of branches will be
present in functional setting, at least selection for (or against)
some specific constructions, like those evaluating to nuber close to
zeros in real number arithmetics. In imperative setting, there will be
selection for branches that could do "something good" despite anything
would be done by the rest of the program. Some means for
non-functional communication, as through references to global
variables, may evolve. The alleles of a branch are all other
branches. So if a promising branch appears, it may span through
population, even with multiple occurences in one program. Yet because
the branches are not clearly distinguished (do not have "the strong
identity") and the shortest are the best survivors (but "short" here
is relative to the program size), one cannot rather expect evolution
of features resembling "ants colony" or "multicell organism", where
many almost-identical branches cooperate and spontaneus signal
dependent specialisation of branches emerges. Generally, in imperative
setting branches evolve a little mostly by eliminating destructive
effects. Trunks in both settings are responsible for program behavior,
but in functional setting they really decide it (as they can just
ignore what branches evaluate to). For trunks there is almost no
difference between mutation and crossover. From trunks' point of view,
classical GP is a system with mutation only, that is a multipoint
hill-climber. Trunks grow, that is program's functionality is attained
by at first selecting promising "trunk seeds" and then adding
improvements to them. This is so because mutation has no access to
inside of a trunk without destroying it, and crossover could VERY
rarely do such a trick. Summarising, classical GP combines kinds of
USels from two early stages of evolution: the first stage, when genes
played on their own (chromosomes were not formed yet), is ironically
introduced to GP setting by recombination operator, that was meant to
introduce the "real" genes from the third stage of gene cooperation;
and the second stage, when genetic information was spread only by
cloning, and each organism was like a species on its own.



5. The MCS (Maximal Common Schemata) crossover - the idea and its
   exemplification

Schemata seen as hypoteses. How Radcliffe defines good
recombination operators. MCS crossover conserves in
children as many of schemata shared by parents as possible. It is
relevant to schemata (hypotesis) space chosen. An algorithm for
combining terms (constructed only with application) is presented -
Terms MCSC (last C for Crossover or Combinator). The proof for its MCS
property is given.

Generally, schema could be seen as a feature of structures, a set over
them, defined syntactically in a language just by little extending the
language of these structures representation. E. g. the "following
schema" activity I understand as acting by a "surface analogy" (as
opposed to deep analogy, which may not be recognised without an
analysis) to some prototypical behaviour. We will work with simple,
mathematical structures, most of them can be described by graphs with
labelled nodes and with labelled edges. The central structure of
programming formalism are terms, and the bulk of formalisations of
computation mostly combine the formalism of lambda calculus or alike
with term rewriting (with some form of unification).  For terms,
schema is a term with free variables. Two terms are said to share the
schema if they both unify with it. The set of terms unifying with
given schema may be called a forma, to follow notation of
Radcliffe. First-order schema is a term with free variables of first
order only (that is, not applied to any arguments and thus not
representing functions). Higher-order schema is non-first-order
schema. When "unifier" is treated as a term (often a schema), I mean
the initial term with unifying substitution performed. Radcliffe
introduces some notions describing properties recombination operators
should try to obey:

 - purity: children of identical parents are identical to them

 - respect: children are members of all formae common to parents (that
   is, such that both parents belong to them)

 - assortment: for formae with nonempty intersection, if each contains
   at least one of the parents, there is a descendant (not including
   other genealogical lines) contained in all of them 

 - strict assortment: for formae with nonempty intersection, if each
   contains at least one of the parents, there is a child contained in
   all of them

 - gene transmission: children are contained only in formae
   containing at least one of parents

Unification of schemata (with maximal unifiers) corresponds to
intersection of formae. Schemata can be compared, a schema s is called
more general than a schema t, written as s <= t, in other words the
schema t is called an instance of the schema s (or is more concrete
than s), written as t >= s, iff there is a substitution r: r(s) = t,
so if F(x) denotes forma corresponding to a schema x, then F(t) <=
F(s). Decreasing order of formae inclusion corresponds to increasing
order of schemata detailment. Maximal schema of a set is such member
of this set that any other member is either smaller (with respect to
introduced ordering) or incomparable. Common schema of two terms is a
schema that unifies with both terms. Maximal common schema is a
maximal schema in the set of all common schemata. The notion of
respect would require that a child was unificable with all maximal
common schemata, which would often lead to situation, when only
cloning one of the parents (although they differ) is possible, or to
children often more complicated than parents (and longer), the
variation of offspring would decline too much. So I relax here the
requirement of respect to the requirement that a child should unify
with some maximal common schema of the parents. Neither assortment I
want to keep for my recombination operator in such a demanding
form. Schemata are just too arbitrary and too numerous equivalence
relations. To follow the ideas from previous section, I decided to
minimalise the possible cuting positions. If only it prooved useful,
one can augment my operator with a more assorting one (that could cut
in more positions). The situation is different than the stated by
Radcliffe. Assortment is not in conflict with respect here. It is just
that not all schemata are related to performance! And the smaller the
schema, the less it is related to performance. By keeping some bigger
schemata from one parent, I can establish them as the means of
selection, or genes in the notion of Williams. When this goal is
achieved, one can reintroduce assortment by crossing-over thus
selected genes at low probability (it is intra-gene recombination,
recombination of parts of alleles of one gene). But what genes am I
talking of? When selecting a maximal schema, in natural way two
substitutions are formed: one leads from schema to one parent, and the
second to the other parent. Recombination now is done by RECOMBINING
THE SUBSTITUTIONS! Each variable in a schema has two "alleles": one is a
substitution from first unificator, and second is a substitution from
second unificator. Gene transmission can also be only ment in terms of
such introduced genes: each joint introduces a schema not present in
parents. Now one can see that schemata were used just to introduce the
notion of respect into the terra incognita, with hope, that a more
accurate notion of genes will emerge by itself! Lets leave rest of the
divagations to the next section and get to the work.

We will use lambda-terms with lambda abstraction and its
beta-reduction in metalangue, that is for formalisation purposes only,
they need not appear in implementation. The language and metalanguage
lambda abstractions are to be distinguished! The metalanguage beta
reduction should only reduce at metalanguage lambda abstractions. We
need to restrict what can be substituted for schema variables, because
if all (meta)lambda-terms were allowed, too wierd schemata would unify
with both parents, e. g. with junk code, discarded when reducing (or,
even worse, they could unify by performing a
"computation"). Substitutions are to be subterms that were cut out of
the term when forming a schema. The outerly bound variables appear at
cut positions, so that after substitution the term could be "glued" by
(meta)beta reduction. That means substituted term must be linear (no
variable repeted), no abstracted variable omitted, no variable applied
to any argument. Imagine the tree representation of a term: when
forming schema we cut out connected (coherent) bits of the tree, we
place variable in the hole and connect it with edges that vere cut,
and store the part cut out for further substitution. As can be seen,
higher-order schemata which I here gradualy define, is somewhat
arbitrary when compared to the clean definition from previous
paragraph, because I want the algorithm to be simple enough, and the
space of schemata to be tuned (the smaller space the better) for the
purpose of "gene extraction". In functional setting, trunks of term
trees are more important than branches - such goals can be achieved by
extending the ordering of schemata. Schemata for GP serve a certain
purpose: the invariance to mutation, more complex schemata should be
used when they serve on their own (e. g. in theorem proving or
categorising). Mutation introduces new genes, and the common regions
recognition separates them out. Mutation should be able to introduce
and reduce code not only at branches (first-order mutation), but
inside the tree, too (not merely mutating atoms (constants or
variables) for other atoms). Mutation should not exchange code,
e. g. switch branches, inside the program: it is too vague a way of
moving code (more "elegant" -- self-evolving ones -- will be shown
later), and too hard to trace syntactically (so that an MCS would
guess with low prob. of error that this kind of event happened). This
implies that the order, in which bound variables appear in
substitution, must be the same as the order of their
abstraction. Summing things up, we have:

schema: an expression of the language extended with metavariables (of
  each type), with (only) free occurrences of metavariables, and no
  metavariable is applied to other metavariable, (*)

substitution term: either first-order term or: (meta)lambda-term with
  metavariables abstracted at root position, linear, no abstracted
  variable omitted in the body, all metavariables are first-order,
  they appear in the body in the same order in which they were
  abstracted. (**)

Performing substitution means substituting for free variables in
schemata defined in (*) the substitution terms defined in (**), and
then "meta"-beta-reducing. Now the time comes to give the algorithm
that finds the MCS of two terms with respect to this
substitution. Every journey starts from the first step.

Fact 1. A subterm of a MCS of terms t1 and t2 is a MCS of some subterms
of t1 and t2.

Definitions. Ordering of term positions will mean here the partial
ordering of term positions with root as the lowest element, where
arguments are higher than functors applied to them. Linear ordering of
term positions will mean here the linear ordering of positions (often
incomparable w.r.t. the above ordering), according to the order they
appear in the linear representation (sometimes called
prefix-ordering).

Finding MCS of terms t1 and t2:

1) for each constant, collect positions of its occurrence in t1 and t2
   (separately)

2) 

With sequences, we are close in spirit with "Algebra of Genetic
Algorithms", because I can find more reasonable equivalences between
sequences than between terms. Let's do a brainstorm (seeking for
similarities or formae):

1) there is the same value in both sequences

2) there is the same value in the same position in both sequencess

3) in both sequences value x appears before value y, which appears
   before value z, which appears ...

4) in both sequences appears: the same directed edge x-y, that is the
   subsequence xy; the same undirected edge x-y, that is the
   subsequence xy or yx; the corner x-y-z, that is the subsequence xyz
   or zyx (TSP formae taken from the work of Hofmann)

5) in both sequences value x appears at least k times and no more than
   n times

6) one undirected edge appears before other undirected edge

7) both sequences have the same value at the nth from end position

8) both sequences have a common subsequence in the middle of them (but
   one sequence is very short, and the other sequence is very long)

9) etc...

The "family" of algorithms I present would (intentionally) respect
some of formae from group 1), 3), 4). They could be directed to
respect some of formae from groups 2), 7) and 8). This is because the
algorithms respect common substructures starting from "root"
position. Farther on, they respect formae like 3), but the more
"concise" the schemata the more probable they are to be respected,
e. g. 4), unless some other schema comes "in the way" on search
directed from "roots" towards "leaves". The kind of structures that
can use this algorithm are, for example, flow-graphs with no
(explicite) recurrences. I work only with linear schemata.

The sketch for polynomial, but not complete algorithms for MCS
detection, together with creation of unifiers:

1. Let T be a class of finite directed acyclic structures
   (graphs). With each such structure relate an ordering which is a
   transitive closure of the relation represented by the structure
   (graph).

2. Nodes are assigned the values, whose introduce equivalence on
   nodes. For the purposes of algorithm, there are added new kinds of
   values: metavariables, and the value "empty", which says that
   all nodes joined to the empty node by outgoing edges should be
   joined to all nodes joined to the empty node with ingoing edges,
   e. g. "a --> empty --> b" ==> "a --> b".

3. For the two graphs for which an MCS is sought, a set EQP is created
   which contains all pairs of equivalent nodes, the first in the pair
   from one graph, and the second from the other graph. A pair from a
   set of node pairs is said to be quasiminimal (name indicates, that
   no proper ordering is introduced) if one of its elements is minimal
   in the set of nodes at the same position in pairs in the set. A
   pair is said to be minimal in the set of node pairs, if it is
   minimal in the intersection of "axis-orderings" (that is, a pair is
   above other pair if both nodes from the pair are above the
   corresponding nodes of the other pair) - a default ordering of
   pairs of nodes. Pairs are crossing if a node in one pair is below
   the corresponding node in the other pair, and the other node is
   above the other node in the other pair.

4. A set of mutually not crossing pairs is called a layer. Two layers
   are crossing if either some of their pairs are crossing or some
   pair from one layer is above some pair in the other layer and
   vice-versa.

5. An assembly is created by choosing a maximal layer of the pairs
   quasiminimal in EQP, then choosing a maximal layer of the pairs
   quasiminimal in the set of pairs from EQP above the pairs of the
   previous layer, and so on. These layers are not crossing. A node is
   above a layer, if it is above a node belonging to some pair of the
   layer.

6. Assembly represents a schema with a pair of unifiers. A child is
   created as follows: choose one of the parents (the mother) and copy
   it as a child.

7. Then, for consecutive layers of the assembly, group the pairs of
   the actual layer, so that there were no two pairs in different
   groups having a common node above nodes of corresponding positions,
   unless this "common" node appears above the next layer.

8. For each group choose a parent, and replace in the child all nodes
   above the node belonging to the group with all nodes above the
   corresponding node (the same, or counterpart in the pair) from the
   parent (the substructures).

9. Proceed to the next layer if there is any and return to point 7.



Algorithms for recombination operators are given.

Algorithms for terms:

1. The set of cequal values positions pairs of two terms:

EQP(s, t) = { (p, q) @ Pos(s)*Pos(t) | Root(s|p) = Root(t|q) }

where Root(t) denotes atom at root position of term t;

2. The assembly of terms s and t is defined as the tree over EQP(s, t)
   (nodes belong to this set), except of the root position, which is
   always (e, e): root positions pair, with position ordering
   compatible with position orderings of both terms: node (p1, q1) is
   above node (p, q) iff position p1 is above position p and position
   q1 is above position q, call this relation Ord2; if (p1, q1) and
   (p2, q2) are directly (immediately) above node (p, q), then p1 and
   p2 are incomparable and q1, q2 are incomparable with respect to
   position ordering, call this two-fold incomparability NotCrossing;
   denote the ith subtree adjoined to the root of Asm(s, t) by
   Asm(s,t)[i] and the degree of root node by deg(Asm(s,t))

3. Recombination of an assembly with distributional bias db is a random
   process returning a term Recomb (Assembly(s,t), db), where:

Recomb (asm, db) = let p, q = Root(asm) in
  let  s' = s|p and t' = t | q in
    s'{[Recomb (asm[i], db)](fst asm[i])}_i=1..deg(asm)
      with probability db
    t'{[Recomb (asm[i], db)](snd asm[i])}_i=1..deg(asm)
      with probability 1-db

where t{[ti]pi}_i=1..n denotes term t with n substitutions: terms ti
substituted in positions pi; t|p denotes subterm of t at position
p. Terms created, in functional setting, can share common code (only
paths to substitution places are to be copied).

4. Creation of the assembly, which corresponds to finding an MCS of
   two terms, Assemble (s, t) = Asm (s, t) where:

start with Eqp = EQP(s, t)

Asm(s, t) = Assem ((e, e), Eqp) where

Assem ((p, q), eqp) = let:

  EqMin = sum for all i<=arity of value at positions p, q
    {(p1, q1) @ eqp | p1 is minimal in (split_fst eqp) or q1 is
      minimal in (split_snd eqp)
     and p1=p^i^_, q1=q^i^_}; (* in non-conservative mode *)
   (* call this set Bottom((p, q), i, eqp) *)

  eqp := eqp - EqMin

  Next = choose at random pairs from EqMin, until a maximal set of
         NotCrossing pairs is achieved; in conservative setting,
         choose pairs such that places of split_fst/snd (Next) list
         elements are compatible with "lexicographic" order of term
         positions: lexicographic order modified so that positions one
         of which is above the other are incomparable (but because in
         Next are only "vertically" incomparable positions, the linear
         order will be sustained)

  return AsmTree ((p, q),
    ...,
    Assem (Next[i], above (ord2, Next[i], eqp)),
    ...) (* a leaf in Next is empty *)

Bottom ((p, q), i, eqp) is the set of all possible continuations of
a schema at ith argument position: either a singleton {p^i, q^i},
denoting a fixed position, or a set of arguments possible to a
metavariable, which is the ith argument to previous fixed position of
the schema. If the check for "i" was not performed, the motion of
"schema" respected would have to be even more relaxed.

Algorithms for sequences:

Sequence can be seen as a right-folded term, where [a b c d] would
correspond to a (b (c (d ()))). But, if reasonable, the root position
can be choosen at other index, maybe dependent on the sequence itself;
e.g. [f g a x y z] may be seen as a (f (g ()), x (y (z ()))).


Now I will try to show, that the above algorithms respect maximal
common schemata, as defined earlier, and that for all schemata there
are parents for which the schema is achievable. These considerations
are not meant to "proove" anything, so they are by no means
formal. They just try to foundate the "purpose" for given algorithms -
that they "rather" do respect the specified MCS.

Suppose, for the sake of contradiction, that there is a more concrete
schema common to parents than the maximal respected in given algorithm by
certain assembly.

If it was the case, we would either:

  get a first-order schema by substituting first-order variables for
  higher-order variables, that does not unify with all children
  generated from given assembly. That is, the schema would not unify
  with the assembly term (substitute for pairs from EQP the values
  they represent). That is, in EQP there would be a pair, directly
  above one of pairs from assembly, not in the assembly. It is a
  contradiction, because this pair would be NotCrossing with all other
  pairs belonging to Bottom sets (because it would form a Bottom
  singleton) and above the "witness" pair from assembly, and therefore
  would have to be added to the assembly.

  or, there would be an argument, applied to the metavariable of "the
  more concrete" schema, the metavariable having no other metavariable
  at its path to the root (those that are still in the schema after
  making all variables "first-order") ("minimal" metavariable), being
  more concrete than all comparable (with respect to concreteness)
  subterms of schema respected by the assembly, which are the
  arguments applied to metavariables "minimal" in the same way. Then,
  applying the whole proof recurrently to appropriate subterms of:
  parents, more concrete schema and assembly, would show a
  contradiction as well; the proof terminates because terms are finite
  and acyclic. In other words, the recurrent definition of assembly
  algorithm indicates that there would be an assembly created for that
  subterms of parents which unify with chosen argument, the assembly
  respecting only less concrete schemata than this argument.

  or, there would be more arguments at some of the "minimal" arguments
  (arguments to "minimal" variables), than in corresponding
  metavariable of schema respected by the assembly. That is, there
  would be in EQP(s, t) a pair above some node of assembly, belonging
  to Bottom set for some i, NotCrossing with any other pair from this
  Bottom set, and yet not included into assembly, what contradicts the
  maximality with respect to NotCrossing relation.

  or, after matching the at-least-as-concrete "minimal" arguments of
  the more concrete with corresponding "minimal" arguments of the
  respected schema, there are unmatched arguments in respected schema;
  such an argument must match a subterm of the more concrete schema,
  and thus the "minimal" argument which contain this subterm cannot be
  matched with any other "minimal" argument of respected schema; after
  "deletion" of the unmatched argument from respected schema (the
  smaller schema is still respected) this reduces to the previous case.

Any other possibility:

  the first-order "trunks" of chosen schema and respected schema are
  incomparable, or the respected one is less general

  there is a subterm in respected schema that is incomparable with any
  subterm of chosen schema

obviously cannot describe a more concrete schema.

Now, take any schema cs unifying with both (ground, that is - not
schema) terms s and t and a pair of unifications us and ut that unify
cs with s and t. Create the set CSEQP of pairs of positions from s and
t that for these unifications match against the same fixed position of
cs. Observe that CSEQP <= EQP(s, t) and that two elements of CSEQP
either are NotCrossing, or related with Ord2. Create an assembly by
choosing at each time Next = CSEQP & EqMin (& denotes
intersection). Suppose that some pair from CSEQP was not chosen for
Next at any time of creation of assembly, call it ncp. Find in the
assembly a maximal pair that is below the ncp. Then, while the set
Next was created for this pair, the ncp was not chosen, and because it
is NotCrossing with all pairs it is not related with Ord2 in CSEQP, it
must have not been minimal - there must have been a pair in Next below
the ncp. But the presence of a pair in between would contradict the
fact that Next is created for the maximally high pair below ncp - it
means, that the pair that is in Next has one of its nodes equal to one
of ncp nodes. If no situation like this happens, the assembly created
will correspond to cs with unifiers us and ut.

That all pairs from CSEQP belong to some Bottom ((p, q), i, eqp) in
non-conservative setting can be seen from the fact, that unification
matches only arguments at corresponding argument positions when the
function position is fixed, and that when fixed position is supplied
with variable, the positions of its arguments do not matter, but they
still must match against subterms of the same subterm which is above
(p, q) in both unified terms.

In conservative setting, the fact that all pairs (p, q) from CSEQP
such that p is above q or q is above p belong to some Next steems from
the fact, that, additionally to what was said, allowed substitutions
have occurrences of bounded variables in the order of their
abstraction, so that matches to arguments in all unifications must be
performed in lexicographic order: first argument to lexicographically
first subterm to be matched, second to lex. second argument to be
matched against the arguments of given variable, etc.

Not only that all pairs from CSEQP belong to some Next, but also that,
sum of all Next's of algorithm run must constitute CSEQP for some
common schema, should be clear enough now, this observation to support
the maximality proof.

The maximal common schemata that will be chosen by the algorithm will
tend to be the inapropriate ones, will not transfer genes thus
blocking the emergence of them, because each point mutation (the
change of one atom) will be able to disturb the maximal schema
respected above the point of mutation. A "dreamed" recombination
algorithm would corelate the maximal schemata probability to be
respected with its size (its length) (and then all maximal schemata
could be selected). For now, I do not know how it could be done
without enumeration of schemata or unifications. There are technics
that improve the length of schema to be respected by local search,
corelating the amount of search with the effectivity of increasing the
length of schemata (but as we would not be sure if the schema is the
longest common schema, and we would just modify the algorithm I gave
not to restrict it so that all maximal schemata were in its search
space, we would not be sure as well of the maximality of the schema
chosen). The situation seems to be similar to other situations where
solutions are to be sought in big search space. If one decides to
evolve terms incrementally, that is without the need of alleles deep
in the trees, one can use a crossover which respects biggest
first-order schemata, with substitutions of first order only, that is
without meta abstractions. This has only one shortcoming: very low
assortment. But it can have very quick implementations, that need time
linear w.r.t. the length of terms supplied, and with a low
coefficient. (The previous algorithm needs time quadratic w.r.t. the
length of terms.) Moreover, it allows even more sharing of code,
because first-level substitutions can be fully shared with
parent. Sharing common code belonging to schemata (first-order
schemata are "monolitic") can be done by transforming schemata into
metafunctions (that is by lambda-abstracting their free
metavariables). Also observe, that for first-order schemata there is
only one maximal common schema, and no bizzarement of the notions of
schema and substitution is needed.

Algorithm for recombination respecting common first-order schemata,
with distributional bias db: Start from roots of both terms. If the
same atom is at actual position in both terms, copy it to the child at
actual position and do recurently the same for positions if its
arguments. If the atoms at actual positions differ, choose first
parent with probability db and the other with prob. 1-db and copy the
subterm the parent has at actual position into child.

This algorithm can do a carrier as an augmenting crossover operator
for classical GP systems. The classical GP, which does not use point
mutations, first-order schemata correspond to trunk genes. Classical
crossover respects much of common first-order schema in the child, but
looses the more and more of the common schema from generation to
generation. First-order MCS respecting recombination respects all
common first-order schemata. It lacks assortment, but can introduce
performance-related genes. The classical crossover cannot do this, it
can only evolve "constructing blocks" (see the previous and the next
section), that is genes that are "not that bad" so they can perform in
different circumstances (not "gene as a functional part of program",
but "gene as a constructional module" - see the distinction between
GMs and functional modules; I have got unintented mess in terminology:
functional module of molecular biology is just what constructing block
is, but function-related gene - gene that specialises in certain
function - I relate to gene identified by its locum; the discussion is
delayed to the next section). But, if the genes that "have emerged"
(there are large subpopulations sharing common trunks), my
recombination strictly assorts these genes, where classical
one-pointcrossover assorts but never strictly assorts. It is related
with the important to gene cooperation fact, that classical crossover
presents strong positional bias. But MCS recombination controls
distributional bias, where classical one-point crossover has always
high distributional bias towards the mother. A "geniale" joint-venture
of the first-order MCS recombination and the classical one-point
crossover is possible: exchange random subterms, but only above
certain randomly chosen leaf of the common trunk! That is, in the
corresponding elements of unificators. It gives:

- respect of first-order schemata, or trunks,

- long-term (in long number of generations, as opposed to strict)
  assortment,

- strong positional bias, (but at the cost of high rated
  distributional bias)

- emergence of "locus oriented" genes, that can specialise,

- some means for constructing blocks evolution, especially when the
  population is diverse (young).

It looses:

- strict assortment,

- some (but not all) means for loci-based genes emergence: transfer of
  emergent genes,

- the ability to control distributional bias.

One can join multi-point classical crossover with "my" recombination,
it would eliminate some bad sides, introduce some new bad sides. The
only theoretical advantage of classical crossover is that it gives
(far) more opportunities for proliferation of constructing
blocks. They can evolve "across frontiers" which must be respected by
loci-based, context-sensitive genes emerging in presence of my
recombination. In MCS-GP system with emergence of locus-genes, one can
use classic crossover as two-argument mutation which "supports the
background of evolution".



6. More glimpses of biology and further analyses -  genes,
   replicators, functional modules, development and speciation

Barriers between species are adaptive. But it is often crossover
that does not work in otherwise well-adapted cross-breed. In
genealogical tree of development of variants of a feature there are no
joins, only branchings, even in the micro scale - only improvings in
relatives are interoperative. More about GMs.
